_practices/harness-engineering.md, before:

---
title: "Harness Engineering"
stage: assess
category: Agentic AI Tools
description: "Designing structured environments, constraints, and automated feedback loops (the 'harness') that allow AI agents to operate reliably in complex codebases."
strategic_value: core
devops_phases: [plan, code, test, operate]
---

## Overview

Harness Engineering shifts the focus from writing better prompts to building better *systems* for agents. A "harness" is the set of tools, mocks, sandbox environments, and automated tests that surround an agent, providing it with the precise context it needs and the immediate feedback required to self-correct.

If Context Engineering is about what the agent *knows*, Harness Engineering is about what the agent can *do* and how it *verifies* its actions.

## Core Components

- **Deterministic Environments** — Ephemeral, reproducible sandboxes (Docker, E2B) where agents can run code without side effects.
- **Verification Loops** — Automated test suites (unit, integration, and characterization) that the agent must pass before proposing a change.
- **Context Injection** — Dynamically providing only the relevant 5% of a codebase that an agent needs for a specific task.
- **Action Guardrails** — Rules that intercept agent commands (e.g., preventing `rm -rf /` or unauthorized API calls).
- **Observability** — Detailed logging of agent "thoughts" and tool calls to diagnose where the "harness" failed to guide the agent.

## Why It Matters

- **Reliability** — Moves AI from "probabilistic" to "deterministic" by surrounding it with traditional engineering gates.
- **Autonomy** — Agents can work longer without human intervention if they have a harness to catch and report their own errors.
- **Scale** — Allows teams to deploy dozens of agents across a large codebase with confidence that they won't violate architectural patterns.

## Risks & Considerations

- **Harness Complexity** — Building a robust harness for a legacy system can be as much work as the modernization itself.
- **Brittle Mocks** — If the harness uses mocks that don't match reality, the agent will "hallucinate" success in the sandbox but fail in production.
- **Over-constraining** — A harness that is too tight might prevent the agent from finding creative solutions to refactoring problems.

## Resources

- [OpenAI — Harness Engineering: Leveraging Codex in an Agent-First World](https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/)
- [Martin Fowler — Harness Engineering: Making AI Reliable](https://martinfowler.com/articles/exploring-gen-ai/harness-engineering.html)
- [Authentica — Harness Engineering: Making AI Reliable for Supply Chain](https://authenti.ca/news/harness-engineering)
- [No Vibes Allowed: Solving Hard Problems in Complex Codebases – Dex Horthy, HumanLayer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmvDxxNubIg)

Commit message:

add regression testing classic to CI/CD and Harness Engineering

_practices/harness-engineering.md, after:

---
title: "Harness Engineering"
stage: assess
category: Agentic AI Tools
description: "Designing structured environments, constraints, and automated feedback loops (the 'harness') that allow AI agents to operate reliably in complex codebases."
strategic_value: core
devops_phases: [plan, code, test, operate]
---

## Overview

Harness Engineering shifts the focus from writing better prompts to building better *systems* for agents. A "harness" is the set of tools, mocks, sandbox environments, and automated tests that surround an agent, providing it with the precise context it needs and the immediate feedback required to self-correct.

If Context Engineering is about what the agent *knows*, Harness Engineering is about what the agent can *do* and how it *verifies* its actions.

## Core Components

- **Deterministic Environments** — Ephemeral, reproducible sandboxes (Docker, E2B) where agents can run code without side effects.
- **Verification Loops** — Automated test suites (unit, integration, and characterization) that the agent must pass before proposing a change. Follows the [Regression Test After Every Change](https://oorp.github.io/#regression-test-after-every-change) pattern.
- **Context Injection** — Dynamically providing only the relevant 5% of a codebase that an agent needs for a specific task.
- **Action Guardrails** — Rules that intercept agent commands (e.g., preventing `rm -rf /` or unauthorized API calls).
- **Observability** — Detailed logging of agent "thoughts" and tool calls to diagnose where the "harness" failed to guide the agent.

## Why It Matters

- **Reliability** — Moves AI from "probabilistic" to "deterministic" by surrounding it with traditional engineering gates.
- **Autonomy** — Agents can work longer without human intervention if they have a harness to catch and report their own errors.
- **Scale** — Allows teams to deploy dozens of agents across a large codebase with confidence that they won't violate architectural patterns.

## Risks & Considerations

- **Harness Complexity** — Building a robust harness for a legacy system can be as much work as the modernization itself.
- **Brittle Mocks** — If the harness uses mocks that don't match reality, the agent will "hallucinate" success in the sandbox but fail in production.
- **Over-constraining** — A harness that is too tight might prevent the agent from finding creative solutions to refactoring problems.

## Resources

- [OpenAI — Harness Engineering: Leveraging Codex in an Agent-First World](https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/)
- [Martin Fowler — Harness Engineering: Making AI Reliable](https://martinfowler.com/articles/exploring-gen-ai/harness-engineering.html)
- [Authentica — Harness Engineering: Making AI Reliable for Supply Chain](https://authenti.ca/news/harness-engineering)
- [No Vibes Allowed: Solving Hard Problems in Complex Codebases – Dex Horthy, HumanLayer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmvDxxNubIg)
